# stock-portfolio-optimizer
This project aims to apply advanced optimization algorithms to stock portfolio management to maximize expected returns, reduce investment risks, and achieve diversification. Utilizing historical stock data sourced from platforms like Yahoo Finance and the NASDAQ website, we will implement and compare the effectiveness of genetic algorithms and gradient descent methods in portfolio optimization.

In our approach, individual stocks will be represented as chromosomes within a genetic algorithm framework. We will experiment with various mutation, crossover, and selection techniques to evolve portfolios toward optimal performance. Gradient descent algorithms will be employed to find the minimum of a function, such as risk, to balance the portfolio effectively.

To evaluate the performance of the optimized portfolios, we will use key financial metrics including total return, volatility, and the Sharpe ratio. These metrics will help us determine the trade-offs between risk and return in the portfolios generated by different optimization techniques. If time permits, additional factors and metrics will be incorporated to enrich the analysis.

Objectives:

Implement genetic algorithms and gradient descent for portfolio optimization.
Maximize expected returns while minimizing risks.
Achieve portfolio diversification through algorithmic strategies.
Evaluate performance using metrics like total return, volatility, and Sharpe ratio.
Compare different mutation, crossover, and selection methods within the genetic algorithm.
Data Sources:

Historical stock data from Yahoo Finance.
Historical stock data from the NASDAQ website.
Note: We are open to questions and feedback to improve our project's scope and methodology.

How to run the code:
Ensure that all modules are downloaded from the requirements.txt file before attempting to run
the program.If you do not want to alter any additional parameters, then simply open the main.py 
and run it. This will report on 25 of the top technology stocks in the market from 2018-01-01 
to 2019-12-31. 

The default parameters for the algorithms are as follows:

Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II)
 tickers = [
   "AAPL", "NVDA", "MSFT", "TSM", "AVGO", "ORCL", "CRM", "SAP", "ASML", "CSCO",
   "ADBE", "NOW", "AMD", "ACN", "IBM", "INTU", "QCOM", "TXN", "INTC", "SHOP",
   "ROP", "AMAT", "SONY", "ANET", "PANW"
]
Population size: 100
Number of generations: 500
Starting value: $15,000
Uses tournament selection
SBX (Simulated Binary Crossover) for crossover operator: prob = 0.9
Polynomial mutation for mutation operator: prob = 1/n_stocks


Gradient Descent
 tickers = [
   "AAPL", "NVDA", "MSFT", "TSM", "AVGO", "ORCL", "CRM", "SAP", "ASML", "CSCO",
   "ADBE", "NOW", "AMD", "ACN", "IBM", "INTU", "QCOM", "TXN", "INTC", "SHOP",
   "ROP", "AMAT", "SONY", "ANET", "PANW"
]
Starting value: $15,000
Learning rate: 0.01
Maximum iterations: 1000
Convergence tolerance: 1e-6

Any of these parameters can be changed to alter the experiments ran on the data.
There are no external input files required in order to run the code since all stock
data is pulled from Yahoo Finance. The outputs of the program will include 
a line graph detailing the closing prices of all stock tickers over the time period 
being analyzed. Alongside this, two bar graphs will be output showing the annualized
volatility and yearly returns of the chosen stocks. 

The genetic algorithm will return a Pareto front graph detailing all viable 
non-dominated solutions found during theexperiment. A pie graph showing the ratio for 
how stocks should be invested in to maximize the Sharpe ratio is also output. It will 
also return tabular data in the terminal detailing the most optimized return, volatility, 
sharpe ratio, cumulative returns, annual returns, final portfolio value (from $15,000 
default starting value), and diversification ratio. 

The gradient descent algorithm will return a pie graph similar to the genetic algorithm
which also shows the ratio at which the stocks should be invested in to maximize the
realized Sharpe ratio. It will also return tabular data similar to the genetic algorithm of
the most optimized return, volatility, sharpe ratio, cumulative returns, annual returns, 
final portfolio value (from $15,000 default starting value), and diversification ratio. 
